.. container:: wy-alert wy-alert-warning

   **This document was translated by a machine.**

   We want to make our country more efficient. We believe humans and machines should complement each other. Artificial Intelligence is the technology that will enable such symbiosis. This document has been translated using a mix of state-of-the-art machine translation and human-driven AI. The raw machine translation output has been edited by an automated system trained on millions of professionally corrected sentences. Finally, a human went through the document to make sure that no information had been lost.

   This means leaving behind some stylistic improvements and potential errors. However, this AI-augmented approach to translation allowed us to prepare this English version at a fraction of the cost and time of the legacy translation process (this translation was made in a few days including the human review; we didn’t publish it right away because we had to convert it to reStructuredText in order to share it on GitHub and we had a ton of things to do before that!).

   If you want to contribute with feedback and changes to the Three Year Plan for ICT in the Public Administration, visit the `Github repository <https://github.com/italia/pianotriennale-ict-doc-en>`_.
   
   If there are significant differences between the Italian and the English version of the Three Year Plan, we remind you that only the Italian version approved every year by the Italian Government has legal value.

Data & Analytics Framework
==========================

The *Data & Analytics Framework* (DAF) is part of the activities aimed
at enhancing the national public information heritage. DAF aims to
develop and simplify the interoperability of public data between PAs,
standardize and promote the dissemination of *open data*, optimize data
analysis processes and generate knowledge. The idea is to open the world
of public administration to the benefits offered by modern platforms for
managing and analysing *big data*, acting in four main directions:

-  To significantly amplify the value of the information assets of the
   PA through the use of the big data technologies that help to create
   knowledge about the *decision makers* and drastically reduce the time
   of analysis. Horizontal scalability of these technologies can, in
   fact, extract information from the intersection of multiple data
   bases and process data in *real-time* allowing you to have more
   prospects of analysis on a given phenomenon, in a timely fashion;

-  Foster and optimize data exchange between PAs, minimizing
   transactional costs for access and use. It will be possible to
   overcome the one-to-one conventions scheme, which lead to multiple
   copies of the same data and allow standardized access to an
   ever-updated data;

-  To encourage the diffusion of *open data* and make it more effective.
   DAF, in fact, allows centralized and redistributed public data
   through APIs, ensuring standardization of formats and ways of reusing
   them on up-to-date data;

-  Foster explorational data analysis by teams of *data scientists*,
   both within the PA and at the central level, in order to improve
   knowledge of social phenomena. The analysis techniques used will also
   allow the development of "intelligent" applications that take
   advantage of regularity in data to provide services to citizens,
   businesses and public administrations;

-  Finally, the *framework* will allow the promotion of scientific
   research initiatives on issues of particular interest to the PA,
   encouraging collaboration with universities and research bodies.

The DAF will be structured in accordance with what is defined in the CAD
and Interoperability Model, in Intangible Infrastructures and
consistency with the requirements related to the Monitoring Functions of
the Plan.

The DAF is based on a **big date platform**, composed of: a *data lake,*
a set of *data engines* and tools for data communication.

In the *data lake* personal data such as: (i) data bases that PA
generates in order to carry out its institutional mandate, in compliance
with personal data protection regulations; (ii) data generated by Public
Administration's IT systems such as logs and usage data that do not fall
under the previous definition; (iii) authorized data from the web and
social networks of potential public interest, are stored.

The *Big Data Engines* are useful for harmonizing and processing, both
in *batch* mode and *real-time*, the raw data stored in the *Data lake,*
and implementing models of *machine learning*.

Lastly, data communication tools are useful in favouring the use of data
processed by stakeholders, including through APIs that display data and
functionality to third-party applications.

The implementation and subsequent management of the DAF is entrusted to
**the BDT-PA**, or *PA's Big Data Team*, a team consisting of *Data
scientists*, *Big data* *architects* and domain experts who provide the
conceptual design and evolution of the *Big data* platform, the
construction of interconnection models of different data sources, data
analysis, and development of *machine learning*, the coordination of the
development of *Data applications* and the organisation of scientific
"competitions" on issues of interest to the PA.

The current situation
---------------------

To date there is no public administration *framework* of analysis,
standardization and interchange of public data, which favours the
definition and monitoring of *data-driven* policies at the same time.
Already from 2013, AgID has verified the possibility of using this type
of tools in the specific domain of Public Administration through
numerous experimental initiatives conducted in collaboration with
national research institutes and various Italian universities within the
project *Italia.gov.it,* the digital administration engine.

In recent years, big data technologies have matured to such an extent
that they are used not only in the production environments of major IT
companies (e.g. Google, Facebook, Twitter, Linked-In), but also those of
banks, insurance companies, lotteries and betting operators, trading
companies. Consequently, new professional profiles have emerged, such as
*Data scientists* and the *Big data architects*, whose skills are
considered to be necessary for the governance and the use of *Big data*.

As regards the exchange of data between PAs, the present scenario still
sees the widespread practice of direct accords and agreements between
PAs to regulate the exchange of data necessary for the conduct of
institutional activities. This practice is not scalable and limits the
sharing of public sector information.

Strategic objectives
--------------------

-  Enhance the wealth of public administration information by
   facilitating access to data by PAs and encouraging the creation of
   both central and federated analysis teams.

-  Focus on quality and standardization of data. DAF, in fact, is the
   operational tool that allows to coordinate the efforts described in
   paragraph 4.1 "PA Data", focusing on the processes of generation,
   management, updating and dissemination of data.

-  Facilitate the development and diffusion of open data and *API
   economy*, through which civil society can reuse, in compliance with
   the law, the wealth of public information and create new business
   opportunities. To this end, DAF will develop standardized APIs on
   up-to-date databases to help build applications and services to the
   citizen.

-  Encourage collaborations with universities and research bodies. They
   will be given access to a *sandbox* containing meaningful samples of
   appropriately anonymized data, to stimulate research and create
   useful knowledge for the community.

-  Encourage data exchange between Public Administrations, overcoming
   the limitations of the current practice of access to data based on
   conventions between individual administrations.

-  Rationalize the resources involved in data exchange and in
   *analytics*, including *Data warehouse* and *Business intelligence*.
   These initiatives, often uncoordinated, are often characterized by
   high licensing costs and hardware and they have a high tendency to
   respond many times to the same need.

-  Provide tools that measure in a timely manner the progress of the
   implementation of the Plan and allow integrative or corrective
   actions based on *data-driven* logic to be identified.

Lines of action
---------------

The *DAF,* as said, is based on the development of a *Big data* platform
and on the establishment of a team of *Data scientists, big data
architects* and *Data engineers*. The *Big Data Team of* the PA, set up
within the Digital Team, has the task of actively managing the phase of
conceptual and implementation development of the infrastructure, along
with all phases of the life cycle of the data, from ingestion to
analysis and application development. In addition, BDT-PA will develop
technology and project partnerships between the PAs involved.

The BDT-PA designs and defines the implementation and use of the PA big
data platform by:

-  Identifying the governance model that provides a leadership and
   control role by the Digital Team, in collaboration with AgID and
   paying attention to Privacy;

-  Planning any regulatory adjustments that would facilitate the
   implementation of the project;

-  The definition of the data sources of the *Data lake* and their
   modalities of population. These will be included in the guidelines
   produced under the Interoperability Model;

-  The definition of the logical architecture of the platform and the
   identification of implementing technologies;

-  The identification of information needs useful to the definition of
   *Data driven policy* and the realization of related analytical tools;

-  The use of public and private *cloud* for *storage* and computing;

-  The involvement of the scientific community for the promotion of
   initiatives aimed at conducting research activities on issues of
   interest to the PA;

-  The usage and consultation directives.

Over the next few months, BDT-PA will release the DAF Development Plan.
It will provide an *incremental roll-out* based on the agreements with
the PA that the Digital Team is implementing. In particular, a phase of
experimentation will be planned which will involve a group of selected
central and local PAs and will have the objective to develop data
exchange models and use cases with services for PAs, citizens and
businesses.

The data in the DAF will also be used to synthesise useful knowledge of
the monitoring activities described in Chapter 10 "Management of
Change": in this regard, AgID and the Digital Team will provide tools
that will complement the tool kit described in the action line " Tools
for Monitoring the Implementation of the Plan "of Chapter 10.

+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Subject       | Definition and implementation of the development plan of the experimental phase of the *Data & Analytics Framework*                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Time Frames   | By December 2017                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Players       | AgID, Digital Team                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Description   | Identify the governance model of the DAF and the PAs that will be part of the testing phase. Defining the platform architecture and its evolutionary roadmap. Definition of use cases for the development of services for Public Administrations, Citizens and Businesses. This activity is coordinated with the Guarantee of Privacy.   |
|               |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|               | Implementation of the technological infrastructure, consistent with the development plan of the DAF pilot phase, which implements all the components necessary for the operation of the Platform.                                                                                                                                        |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Result        | DAF Development Plan (*Release date: June 2017*).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
|               |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|               | Big Data Cluster and Component Testing and Use Cases (*Release date: December 2017*).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
+---------------+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Subject       | Data Ingestion in the DAF - Experimental Phase                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Time Frames   | From June 2017 to December 2017                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Players       | AgID, Digital Team                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Description   | Definition of the data to be included in the project during the experimental phase and putting into operation the extraction and ingestion procedures. Defining the relations between the DAF manager and the PAs involved in the initiative.   |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Result        | Regulating relationships with PAs.                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
|               |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
|               | Standard operational definition in compliance with privacy standards.                                                                                                                                                                           |
|               |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
|               | Definition of data ingestion procedures in the platform.                                                                                                                                                                                        |
|               |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
|               | Supply of DAF (release date: December 2017).                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Subject       | Putting DAF into Production                                                                                                                                                                                           |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Time Frames   | From January 2018                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Players       | Digital Team, AgID, PA                                                                                                                                                                                                |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Description   | The Digital Team and AgID will set up procedures for the future *owner* of the DAF that will manage the operation and evolution of the project.                                                                       |
|               |                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
|               | The *owner* of DAF will take care of interactions with PAs to define plans for incorporating their databases and usage cases. PAs from time to time will define how to ingest data and how DAF uses its activities.   |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Result        | Substitute plan.                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
|               |                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
|               | Current operation (release date: to be defined).                                                                                                                                                                      |
+---------------+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

+---------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Subject       | Implementation of support tools for monitoring the Plan                                                                                                                                                 |
+---------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Time Frames   | From April 2017                                                                                                                                                                                         |
+---------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Players       | AgID, Digital Team                                                                                                                                                                                      |
+---------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Description   | The Digital Team and AgID provide tools that, based on the information contained in the DAF, provide useful information for the Plan monitoring activities described in Chapter 10 "Managing Change".   |
+---------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Result        | Plan Monitoring Support Tools *(Since January 2018)*                                                                                                                                                    |
+---------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
